INTRODUCTION TO DATA SCIENCE
LECTURE NOTES
UNIT - 1
Introduction to data science
Data science:
Data science is the domain of study that deals with vast volumes of data using modern tools and
techniques to find unseen patterns, derive meaningful information, and make business decisions.
Data science uses complex machine learning algorithms to build predictive models.
The data used for analysis can come from many different sources and presented in various formats.
Data science is about extraction, preparation, analysis, visualization, and maintenance of
information. It is a cross disciplinary field which uses scientific methods and processes to draw
insights from data.
The Data Science Lifecycle
Data science’s lifecycle consists of five distinct stages, each with its own tasks:
Capture: Data Acquisition, Data Entry, Signal Reception, Data Extraction. This stage involves
gathering raw structured and unstructured data.
Maintain: Data Warehousing, Data Cleansing, Data Staging, Data Processing, Data Architecture.
This stage covers taking the raw data and putting it in a form that can be used.
Process: Data Mining, Clustering/Classification, Data Modeling, Data Summarization. Data
scientists take the prepared data and examine its patterns, ranges, and biases to determine how
useful it will be in predictive analysis.
Analyze: Exploratory/Confirmatory, Predictive Analysis, Regression, Text Mining, Qualitative
Analysis. Here is the real meat of the lifecycle. This stage involves performing the various analyses
on the data.
Communicate: Data Reporting, Data Visualization, Business Intelligence, Decision Making. In
this final step, analysts prepare the analyses in easily readable forms such as charts, graphs, and
reports.
Evolution of Data Science: Growth & Innovation
Data science was born from the idea of merging applied statistics with computer science. The
resulting field of study would use the extraordinary power of modern computing. Scientists realized
they could not only collect data and solve statistical problems but also use that data to solve real-
world problems and make reliable fact-driven predictions.
1962: American mathematician John W. Tukey first articulated the data science dream. In his now-
famous article “The Future of Data Analysis,” he foresaw the inevitable emergence of a new field
nearly two decades before the first personal computers. While Tukey was ahead of his time, he was
not alone in his early appreciation of what would come to be known as “data science.”
1977: The theories and predictions of “pre” data scientists like Tukey and Naur became more
concrete with the establishment of The International Association for Statistical Computing (IASC),
whose mission was “to link traditional statistical methodology, modern computer technology, and
the knowledge of domain experts in order to convert data into information and knowledge.”
1980s and 1990s: Data science began taking more significant strides with the emergence of the
first Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) workshop and the founding of the International
Federation of Classification Societies (IFCS).
1994: Business Week published a story on the new phenomenon of “Database Marketing.” It
described the process by which businesses were collecting and leveraging enormous amounts of
data to learn more about their customers, competition, or advertising techniques.
1990s and early 2000s: We can clearly see that data science has emerged as a recognized and
specialized field. Several data science academic journals began to circulate, and data science

-- 1 of 5 --

proponents like Jeff Wu and William S. Cleveland continued to help develop and expound upon
the necessity and potential of data science.
2000s: Technology made enormous leaps by providing nearly universal access to internet
connectivity, communication, and (of course) data collection.
2005: Big data enters the scene. With tech giants such as Google and Facebook uncovering large
amounts of data, new technologies capable of processing them became necessary. Hadoop rose to
the challenge, and later on Spark and Cassandra made their debuts.
2014: Due to the increasing importance of data, and organizations’ interest in finding patterns and
making better business decisions, demand for data scientists began to see dramatic growth in
different parts of the world.
2015: Machine learning, deep learning, and Artificial Intelligence (AI) officially enter the realm of
data science.
2018: New regulations in the field are perhaps one of the biggest aspects in the evolution in data
science.
2020s: We are seeing additional breakthroughs in AI, machine learning, and an ever-more-
increasing demand for qualified professionals in Big Data.
Stages in a data science project
Data Science workflows tend to happen in a wide range of domains and areas of expertise such as
biology, geography, finance or business, among others. This means that Data Science projects can
take on very different challenges and focuses resulting in very different methods and data sets being
used. A Data Science project will have to go through five key stages: defining a problem, data
processing, modelling, evaluation and deployment.
Defining a problem
The first stage of any Data Science project is to identify and define a problem to be solved.
Without a clearly defined problem to solve, it can be difficult to know how to tackle to the problem.
For a Data Science project this can include what method to use, such as is classification,
regression or clustering. Also, without a clearly defined problem, it can be hard to determine what
your measure of success would be.
Without a defined measure of success, you can never know when your project is complete or is
good enough to be used in production.
A challenge with this is being able to define a problem small enough that it can be solved/tackled
individually.
Data Processing
Once you have your problem, how you are going to measure success, and an idea of the methods
you will be using, you can then go about performing the all important task of data processing. This
is often the stage that will take the longest in any Data Science project and can regularly be the
most important stage.
There are a variety of tasks that need to occur at this stage depending on what problem you are
going to tackle. The first is often finding ways to create or capture data that doesn’t exist yet.
Once you have created this data, you then need to collect it somewhere and in a format that is useful
for your model. This will depend on what method you will be using in the modelling phase but it
will involve figuring out how you will feed the data into your model.

-- 2 of 5 --

The final part of this is to then perform any pre-processing steps to ensure that the data is clean
enough for the modelling method to work. This may involve removing outliers, or choosing to keep
them, manipulating null values, whether a null value is a measure or whether it should be imputed
to the average, or standardising the measures.
Modelling
The next part, and often the most fun and exciting part, is the modelling phase of the Data Science
project. The format this will take will depend primarily on what the problem is and how you defined
success in the first step, and secondarily on how you processed the data.
Unfortunately, this is often the part that will take the least amount of time of any Data Science
project, especially when there are many frameworks or libraries that exist, such as sklearn,
statsmodels, tensorflow and that can be readily utilised.
You should have selected the method that you will be using to model your data in the defining a
problem stage, and this may include simple graphical exploration, regression, classification or
clustering.
Evaluation
Once you have then created and implemented your models, you then need to know how to
evaluate it. Again, this goes back to the problem formulation stage where you will have defined
your measure of success, but this is often one of the most important stages.
Depending on how you processed your data and set-up your model, you may have a holdout
dataset or testing data set that can be used to evaluate your model. On this dataset,
you are aiming to see how well your model performs in terms of both accuracy and reliability.
Deployment
Finally, once you have robustly evaluated your model and are satisfied with the results, then you
can deploy it into production. This can mean a variety of things such as whether you use the insights
from the model to make changes in your business, whether you use your model to check whether
changes that have been made were successful, or whether the model is deployed somewhere to
continually receive and evaluate live data.
Applications of data science in various fields
Major Applications of Data Science

-- 3 of 5 --

1. In Search Engines
The most useful application of Data Science is Search Engines. As we know when we want to
search for something on the internet, we mostly used Search engines like Google, Yahoo, Safari,
Firefox, etc. So Data Science is used to get Searches faster.
2. In Transport
Data Science also entered into the Transport field like Driverless Cars. With the help of Driverless
Cars, it is easy to reduce the number of Accidents.
For Example, In Driverless Cars the training data is fed into the algorithm and with the help of
Data Science techniques, the Data is analyzed like what is the speed limit in Highway, Busy Streets,
Narrow Roads, etc. And how to handle different situations while driving etc.
3. In Finance
Data Science plays a key role in Financial Industries. Financial Industries always have an issue of
fraud and risk of losses. Thus, Financial Industries needs to automate risk of loss analysis in order
to carry out strategic decisions for the company. Also, Financial Industries uses Data Science
Analytics tools in order to predict the future.
For Example, In Stock Market, Data Science is the main part. In the Stock Market, Data Science
is used to examine past behavior with past data and their goal is to examine the future outcome.
4. In E-Commerce
E-Commerce Websites like Amazon, Flipkart, etc. uses data Science to make a better user
experience with personalized recommendations.
For Example, When we search for something on the E-commerce websites we get suggestions
similar to choices according to our past data and also we get recommendations according to most
buy the product, most rated, most searched, etc. This is all done with the help of Data Science.
5. In Health Care
In the Healthcare Industry data science act as a boon. Data Science is used for:
Detecting Tumor.
Drug discoveries.
Medical Image Analysis.
Virtual Medical Bots.
Genetics and Genomics.
Predictive Modeling for Diagnosis etc.
6. Image Recognition
Currently, Data Science is also used in Image Recognition. For Example, When we upload our
image with our friend on Facebook, Facebook gives suggestions Tagging who is in the picture.
This is done with the help of machine learning and Data Science. When an Image is Recognized,
the data analysis is done on one’s Facebook friends and after analysis, if the faces which are present
in the picture matched with someone else profile then Facebook suggests us auto-tagging.
7. Targeting Recommendation
Targeting Recommendation is the most important application of Data Science. Whatever the user
searches on the Internet, he/she will see numerous posts everywhere.
example: Suppose I want a mobile phone, so I just Google search it and after that, I changed my
mind to buy offline. Data Science helps those companies who are paying for Advertisements for
their mobile. So everywhere on the internet in the social media, in the websites, in the apps
everywhere I will see the recommendation of that mobile phone which I searched for. So this will
force me to buy online.
8. Airline Routing Planning
With the help of Data Science, Airline Sector is also growing like with the help of it, it becomes
easy to predict flight delays. It also helps to decide whether to directly land into the destination or
take a halt in between like a flight can have a direct route from Delhi to the U.S.A or it can halt in
between after that reach at the destination.
9. Data Science in Gaming

-- 4 of 5 --

In most of the games where a user will play with an opponent i.e. a Computer Opponent, data
science concepts are used with machine learning where with the help of past data the Computer
will improve its performance. There are many games like Chess, EA Sports, etc. will use Data
Science concepts.
10. Medicine and Drug Development
The process of creating medicine is very difficult and time-consuming and has to be done with full
disciplined because it is a matter of Someone’s life. Without Data Science, it takes lots of time,
resources, and finance or developing new Medicine or drug but with the help of Data Science, it
becomes easy because the prediction of success rate can be easily determined based on biological
data or factors. The algorithms based on data science will forecast how this will react to the human
body without lab experiments.
11. In Delivery Logistics
Various Logistics companies like DHL, FedEx, etc. make use of Data Science. Data Science helps
these companies to find the best route for the Shipment of their Products, the best time suited
for delivery, the best mode of transport to reach the destination, etc.
12. Autocomplete
AutoComplete feature is an important part of Data Science where the user will get the facility to
just type a few letters or words, and he will get the feature of auto-completing the line. In Google
Mail, when we are writing formal mail to someone so at that time data science concept of
Autocomplete feature is used where he/she is an efficient choice to auto-complete the whole
line. Also in Search Engines in social media, in various apps, AutoComplete feature is widely used.

-- 5 of 5 --

